[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>REGINA MEREDITH: They
call her a modern day hidden
figure, the true story
of women of color who
were key figures behind
NASA's early space missions.
Olympia LePoint experienced
repeated childhood trauma,
which drove her to
academics as an escape,
becoming an award-winning
rocket scientist.
When memories of abuse surfaced
later in life, however,
she knew the time had come
to deconstruct her life
and her brain function.
This led her to her current
work, "Answers Unleashed--
The Science of Unleashing
Your Brain's Power."
I'm so excited to have you here.
You're just
absolutely delightful.
And wow, what a story.
I thought, what more
can happen to a woman
than what happened
to you in life?
Not a laughing matter,
but you've overcome it.
So I guess we can have
a little levity in it.
Aside from the incredible
work that you're
doing in helping people really
learn how to use total brain
function in a
useful, everyday way,
your personal story
is so inspirational.
Just like the movie "Hidden
Figures" was inspirational--
I loved it; I saw
it a few times--
in its own way, what these
women had to go through--
>>OLYMPIA LEPOINT: Oh, yes.
>>REGINA: To be
in this position.
>>LEPOINT: Oh, yes.
>>REGINA: And it didn't
change all that much.
>>LEPOINT: No, and it
didn't change in my life.
>>REGINA: No, you're young.
So it hasn't changed all
that much, it's fair to say.
And you know, one of the
things that was intriguing,
that we'll get into
as a little back story
before we go into
your personal story,
and then get into
the science of it,
is that when you ended
up-- once you were an adult
and you had all your
accolades and you
were working with
rocket scientists--
and they have to have your
sign-off before a test, right?
>>LEPOINT: Yeah.
>>REGINA: You were
able to observe genius
at a level most
people never see.
>>LEPOINT: Oh, yeah.
>>REGINA: Because we think nerdy
little guys with clipboards,
right?
That's what we think
of when we think
of geniuses behind the
space aeronautics industry,
for example.
So let's talk
about not only what
you observed-- you ultimately
had to develop that
within yourself.
>>LEPOINT: Oh, Yes.
Oh, I remember the first day
working at this rocket science
company.
And I remember walking down
the hallway and looking around,
and there were very few women.
And then I looked around and
there were very few people
of color, on top of
the need to execute
in an environment with
that technical side.
And I remember looking
in this environment
and feeling scared at first.
>>REGINA: Well, yeah.
>>LEPOINT: Feeling
completely scared.
>>REGINA: A stranger
in a strange land.
>>LEPOINT: And I thought,
how am I going to do this?
I've been trained
in mathematics.
I've been trained to do this
math on this high level.
But I remember being
first, just intimidated.
I wasn't quite sure
if I could do it.
>>REGINA: Mm-hmm.
>>LEPOINT: And I found myself
working with brilliant men.
And I remember just
studying them, and studying
how they were looking
at situations,
and how they were
breaking apart scenarios,
and just sitting down
with them and asking them
about how did they come
up with this design
and what did they look at?
And in the process
of doing that,
I realized that there's
different type of geniuses.
>>REGINA: Mm-hmm
>>LEPOINT: Not
everyone thinks alike.
And everyone has their unique
way that they see the world
and they process information.
And when they're able to use
the way in which they are born
to use, and they
create things with it,
that's how they
show their genius.
And I saw all different
types of geniuses.
I saw people who could look
at data across a screen
and be able to
know mathematically
what was going to happen.
I saw individuals who could look
at reams and reams of welding
data and know exactly
how the engine would
fall apart and explode.
I was around this one
individual, Jeff was his name.
He was a program manager of
this entire engineering group.
And he would have dreams
on the type of rockets
that he could build.
And his mission
was communicating
to every single person in
his 200-person team of how
to build this rocket so
it was going to be safe.
>>REGINA: And based on
a vision in a dream?
>>LEPOINT: Based on
his own intuition.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>LEPOINT: And it
was profound for me.
Here I was adding
to the situation.
But at the same
time, I was learning.
And there was just so much--
so much that I didn't know.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>LEPOINT: And there's
still so much I don't know.
I mean, it was like--
it was this ability
to appreciate how people
think, and how we each have
this ability to unleash
a genius brain power,
no matter what we do.
>>REGINA: It's true.
And most people don't feel
that, because humanity
has a general kind of
inferiority complex.
We're just kind of raised
that way as a species.
One thing or another teaches
us that we're insufficient.
And I think one of the
biggest ones for people,
one of the biggest fears
for most people is math.
>>LEPOINT: Oh, gosh, oh, yeah.
>>REGINA: And you even
had issues with it
at one time in your life, right?
>>LEPOINT: Oh, yeah.
It is amazing.
People always think that
really smart people always
have to ace mathematics, always
have to do well in school,
have to have a high GPA.
That's not true.
>>REGINA: Yeah, no, it's not.
>>LEPOINT: Just personally,
I failed algebra.
I failed geometry,
calculus, and chemistry.
And I chuckle, because if we
use the current ways of how
we think intelligence is
supposed to look like,
or smell like or feel like,
our traditional ways of looking
at intelligence, if
we limit it to that,
we're not honoring ourselves
as humanitarians in a society.
Just looking at my
personal experience,
I failed all those classes.
And I had to retrain the
way that I was thinking.
I had to see the
world differently.
And I recognize, in those
situations I had fear.
I had such a fear
about succeeding.
And this was-- I
failed in eighth grade.
I failed in high school.
And even, I think, one or
two classes in university.
And it was like each
time, I had to reanalyze
how I was seeing myself
in regards to what
I could do in the future.
And it wasn't until
I recognized that I
was the one holding myself back
because of my own thoughts--
that was the time
where I realized
I unleash my own brain power.
>>REGINA: Right.
And this is something that
is ubiquitous in society--
the suppression of
our own brain's power.
And going back to that, you're
watching all these genius men,
working their genius in
their own way, almost all--
I assume-- genius
white men, right?
I mean, that's kind of
what the room looked like.
And if you look at
it on studies of--
for example, there have been
studies of brain chemicals
such as serotonin.
The highest levels of serotonin
en masse exist among white men.
Well, because society
has reinforced
that they were the ones that
would have the education,
be respected, have
the knowledge.
So the genius can
unleash itself,
it seems, in that population
at an earlier age--
a little more
readily accepted by
society, family,
accepted by their peers.
But you come into the equation--
>>LEPOINT: Different.
>>REGINA: Totally different.
>>LEPOINT: Totally different.
And being a scientist, I
recognize your science is only
as good as your study.
Your science is only as
good as the population
in which you're observing.
And so all these
other type of science
that has been created
all in the past,
they've really just looked
at one type of group.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>LEPOINT: And so here
I am, a woman of color.
At the time when I
entered rocket science,
it was back in 1998.
So that was 20 years ago.
And I'm thankful I
still look young.
>>REGINA: Yeah, you do.
You look beautiful.
>>LEPOINT: Thank you very much.
>>REGINA: Sexiest
rocket scientist ever.
>>LEPOINT: Oh, thank you.
Thank you.
Coming from you-- thank you.
And it's fascinating,
because as I
went through this
type of scenario
and was in this environment,
the people that encouraged me
the most to move forward were
not as many as the engineers
that you would
think of, although I
had great mentors in
engineers and male leaders
who were guiding me.
And I'm very thankful for that.
The women were the ones--
>>REGINA: Yeah, that
was an interesting--
>>LEPOINT: Who got to me.
>>REGINA: --part of your book.
>>LEPOINT: Yeah, the women.
I remember the second day that
I was working, this man came up.
And he circled around me.
And I remember
thinking to myself,
why is he circling around me?
I looked down.
I thought I had-- like, I
had something in my clothes,
or maybe had tissue
stuck to my heel.
>>REGINA: No, you
looked like you.
>>LEPOINT: And he circled
around me, didn't say anything.
And then he walked off.
And just the caveat
to the story--
he later became one of my
biggest supporters and mentors
later on.
And he was such a wonderful
help to me as time went on.
But I didn't understand that.
I didn't understand the
type of dynamics-- the fact
that I was a person completely
different in that environment.
And he was looking at me
like a museum piece, almost.
And I remember, a
couple of seconds later,
there was these three women.
And they came over to me,
and they says, come with us
over into the restroom.
And I didn't even know
who these women were.
This was my second
day on the job.
And they pulled me
over into the restroom.
And they said, you
don't know who we are.
But we're excited
that you're here.
We have not seen another
engineer, a female engineer
on this floor for 15 years.
And we're excited.
And we just want to
tell you who we are.
We're the-- at the time
they called themselves
secretaries, that's what
they called themselves.
Now the official term is
administrative assistants.
But they said, we're here.
And there will be times
in which you'll be tested.
You're going to be tested.
You're going to have
men push your buttons.
This is not all men.
But there are some men that
will push your buttons.
It will be your job to maintain
your cool and calmness.
>> REGINA: And don't cry.
>>LEPOINT: And don't cry.
And don't cry.
And those words, the second
day of my time there,
was the best mental
advice I could
have received in my almost
decade working as a rocket
scientist.
And sure enough, a
couple of months later--
bam!
I was in a meeting.
And here I was--
I was so emotional inside.
But I had to stay calm.
And I realized that my job was
explaining something complex
so people could understand
the importance of it,
and so they wouldn't necessarily
look at who was giving it,
but rather, appreciate it for
the information that it was.
>>REGINA: Mm-hmm, yeah.
And so you were able
to withstand that.
But it started before that.
It even started in school.
And you ended up--
I mean, you ended up graduating
way up there in your studies,
in mathematics.
Was it like number five or
six out of 6,500 or something?
>>LEPOINT: You have a really--
>>REGINA: I mean,
huge, huge accolades.
>>LEPOINT: Thank you.
Thank you.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>LEPOINT: I graduated
at the top of the class
from California State
University, Northridge
in applied mathematics.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
I mean, I just have
such respect for that,
because you found a way
around the way your brain had
been functioning because of the
fear that was in your being.
Whereas I had a little
different attitude.
I thought, algebra--
what do I need this for?
So I just doodled.
And I designed
clothing during class,
and was perfectly happy when
the teacher gave me a D minus,
saying, I've only
given you a D minus
so I don't see your face again.
>>LEPOINT: Oh!
Oh, really?
Oh, no!
>>REGINA: And I said,
well, that worked.
Thank you.
>>LEPOINT: Oh, no!
>>REGINA: He didn't fail me.
And it was because I couldn't--
no one explained to me
the rationale behind why I
needed this for my everyday
life.
No one explained anything.
And it was put out in
such an uninteresting
way, which happens to
a lot of smart people.
They're just like,
what's the point in this?
So I figured, if I can't see
the usefulness I'll probably
fail it anyway.
So I might as well just design
my little summer outfit here
during class.
>>LEPOINT: You bring
up an excellent point.
What I recognize about my
own experience, as well
as even listening to
your experience too,
I've recognized that really,
really genius people usually
fail often, because they use an
intuitive side to their brain--
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>LEPOINT: In addition
to the book knowledge.
And that was true for me.
I recognized that I
had a logical side.
But I also had an
intuitive side.
And I really do feel that there
is a lot of children in school
systems that are being
labeled as special needs
or are needing
additional assistance,
but really they are
geniuses in disguise.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
>>LEPOINT: And I'm a true
believer that an intuitive
mind--
Einstein was also a believer
of this, Albert Einstein.
An intuitive mind
is a form of genius.
>>REGINA: Yes, absolutely.
I mean, to discount
that, when that's
where almost all
breakthroughs-- in science
included-- have come
from is at the detriment
of all progress on this planet.
>>LEPOINT: Yes.
And when I was working
with the engineers
and I would see their mind,
and I'd see them see something
before it even existed,
I realized the intuition
that the scientists used
was their inventive power.
And it's the ability to be
able to see a future before it
exists, and make the commitment
to bring it into existence.
>>REGINA: Mm-hmm.
>>LEPOINT: And it's not
just done in science.
It is done in our
personal lives.
It is done in education.
It is done in every
single way that we
believe that we can make a
difference in this world.
Gandhi said, you
must be the change
that you wish to
see in the world.
>>REGINA: Right, right.
>>LEPOINT: In order
to be that change,
you have to pick
the future which
is going to be beneficial for
yourself and other people,
and actually create it.
>>REGINA: Yeah, you
have to live into it.
>>LEPOINT: Create it.
>>REGINA: Yeah, absolutely.
Well, now, just so people
understand what you were doing
and what you had created,
I'll read this here.
So your job was to calculate the
odds of catastrophic explosion,
right?
>>LEPOINT: Yes.
>>REGINA: That's a serious--
that's a serious responsibility.
>>LEPOINT: Yes, it was.
Yes, it was.
Honestly, there would be
nights I'd be up, thinking--
this is me, personally--
God, please let
everything be safe.
I would sign off on
these engine tests.
And they couldn't sign off
unless a person in my role--
which was system safety
and reliability--
authorized that every
single thing in that test
was not going to cause
a loss of a human life.
>>REGINA: And that was
everyone else's work?
>>LEPOINT: Everyone else
had their own specific job.
>>REGINA: Right, right.
>>LEPOINT: And my job at
the time was to look at--
>>REGINA: Analyze all that data.
>>LEPOINT: Everything would be
compiled and combined together
to unleash a power
of the engine.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>LEPOINT: And then I realized--
later on, when I
left rocket science--
life is the same way.
It's putting all
the pieces together
to not only unleash
a power in something
that we build, but is to
unleash a power of our life.
>>REGINA: Mm-hmm.
Yeah.
And you had to build it from
a really tough place, which
is now coming up to
that part of the story.
For you, your childhood
was very traumatic.
And yet, at the same time,
certain things were recognized.
You were always intuitive.
>>LEPOINT: Yeah.
>>REGINA: You came
prepackaged that way.
You had certain abilities
that were recognized.
And you were even put in--
well, through a
horrible circumstance--
in a school for more
gifted students.
But let's get back
to your life itself.
It was rough.
And we'll go back to
probably the event that
changed your life, and
shut you down on one hand
and open you up on
the other, which is--
and I want to talk
about it a little bit,
because it's ubiquitous.
And that has to do with
essentially molestation
of children, rape, and so forth.
And you were eight years old
when this happened to you.
It was by your
mother's boyfriend,
or who was it, again?
>>LEPOINT: It was actually
by a family friend.
>>REGINA: A family friend.
>>LEPOINT: A family
friend who I had trusted.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>LEPOINT: And in the middle
of the night, I was raped.
And it sounds horrible to say.
It's even more
horrible to remember.
>>REGINA: Well, when you're
eight years old, yeah.
>>LEPOINT: But what
happened to me personally
is that my brain
literally [CLICKING SOUND]
locked it, shut it down, and
erased the memory until decades
later, when I could handle it.
>>REGINA: Mm-hmm.
>>LEPOINT: And it
was very, very tough.
And it was especially
really tough
because just two years earlier
I had made the decision--
I was six years old.
And I had made the
decision that I was
going to be a rocket scientist.
I was like, yes, yes!
And I remember going to this
Jet Propulsion Laboratory,
seeing the rocket engines.
>>REGINA: Yes, right.
>>LEPOINT: And that was the
exciting part of my life.
I grew up in poverty.
And we had absolutely no money.
We would chew on ice just
to trick ourselves to think
that we were eating food.
And I remember, when
I was six years old,
I went to this field trip.
And it was like the
highlight of my life--
like, oh my god,
I could do this.
But I didn't realize that
I was a woman of color,
and specifically a woman.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>LEPOINT: When I
saw the other men,
the pictures of men
launching rockets.
And fast forward two years
later, and I was raped.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>LEPOINT: And I can
smile and say that now.
I couldn't before.
Because what I recognize
is that through the process
of me going through that,
removing that trauma
from my consciousness, and
for me, removing the shame
that I had regarding
what happened--
it had nothing to do with me.
But it had to do with
me taking my power back.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>LEPOINT: And it
was taking my power
back in the way of not only
the way I saw myself as a woman
in the world, but it
is what I could do
and what I could see for myself,
independent of anything that
happened in the past.
And I speak about
this so passionately.
It is because-- and you and
I were talking about this
earlier--
it's that so many
women, and men, have
gone through situations
where they have been raped
or where they have
been molested.
And what that does is
that shuts down the brain.
And I can speak from
authority from this,
because that's what
happened with me.
And what I did in my
life is that I erased it.
And the way I handled it-- or
thought I was handling it--
was placing myself in science.
>>REGINA: Right
>>LEPOINT: Because
science was the way-- oh,
I didn't have to look
at anything emotionally.
I could just look at
everything as facts.
And I could solve that.
And that brought confidence.
And that connected my brain
on many different levels.
But at the same time, I
had to connect my brain
on an emotional and
spiritual level, in which
the science solely couldn't do.
>>REGINA: Right
>>LEPOINT: And
for me personally,
when I learned to remove
the shame and the stigma--
>>REGINA: Which the women, or
boys, or girls are left with.
>>LEPOINT: Are left with.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>LEPOINT: That
opened up my mind.
That opened up my brain,
where I realized, huh,
it's OK to be a woman.
It's OK to be a woman
launching rockets.
who dresses like a woman.
It is OK to be feminine.
It is OK to be myself.
I don't necessarily have to
fit in any mold of anyone--
how they think I should fit,
because of an experience
where someone puts you in a
certain place in which you
were never belonging
in the first place.
>>REGINA: And you know-- and
I said it initially-- this
is ubiquitous.
And about 20 years ago,
I started hearing things.
You know how things
happen in batches, so
to speak, a certain phenomena
comes to your awareness
all at once, and from
a lot of sources,
just because it's
time to be made aware.
And I was made aware
that most of my friends
had been molested, or even
raped in their childhood--
most of them.
I mean, these are all women who
are doing really well in life,
you know, went on.
And even my own
mother, by her uncle.
And I thought, what is--
do I just know a
peculiar group of people?
And then as the years
went on-- my husband
teaches at university.
And he teaches an emotions
and motivation class.
And literally, something in the
neighborhood-- averaging around
40% of the students, who are
mostly female, in the class
have been through this.
>>LEPOINT: Mm-hmm.
>>REGINA: And the same thing
of boys, in elite schools,
at church, military.
It's almost as though it
is institutionalized, even,
on some levels.
But there's some fracture
in our human character
that would allow this
to be perpetuated
upon the young, the innocent.
But look, if you have
that percentage of people
that have been damaged at
a young age in this way,
look at all that brain power
that's just been shut down.
Who's going to stand up
and protest against what
they don't want, right?
>>LEPOINT: Well, it's shocking
and inspiring at the same time.
And let me break
it down like this.
The Centers for Disease
Control did a study.
And it's just estimated
out of the reports
that one out of five
women have been sexually
assaulted or raped or molested.
And that's just the ones
that have been reported.
>>REGINA: Oh, yeah.
Well that's-- you know
that's not even close.
Probably closer to
two out of five.
>>LEPOINT: Yeah, yeah.
And we know that that's
only of what's reported.
>>REGINA: Right
>>LEPOINT: And in every
single type of case
that someone has gone through,
there is this type of shame.
Can they speak up?
Can they feel that they
can trust themselves again?
What happens-- and I can speak
about this as my own case.
When I realized that I
had to remove that trauma,
about how I saw myself
in the world as a woman,
and being able to
do great things,
from rocket science to writing
books to doing TED lectures,
I realized that I had
been given a gift.
I know that sounds really odd.
>>REGINA: Oh, I understand
what you're saying.
Because you had
to crack the code.
>>LEPOINT: Through
that type of incident,
I had to learn how to
powerfully trust myself.
And in learning how
to trust myself,
I had to build up my
brain power to see
situations not only logically,
not only emotionally,
but in a way that actually
was a healthy emotional way,
and a spiritual way.
And I had to combine
it in a way that
would allow me to see a
situation as the way it
was supposed to be for
where I was supposed to go.
And when I went through
that type of situation,
I recognize that that
trauma introduced a power.
It was such a power
that if I could
take the power that
that situation brought
and actually shift
it so it could
be used in a way that was
going to be beneficial,
anything was possible.
>>REGINA: And that is
the nature of your work,
is unleashing the
power of trauma.
>>LEPOINT: Yeah, yeah.
>>REGINA: And then shifting it.
>>LEPOINT: And unleashing
the power of chaotic trauma.
>>REGINA: Chaotic
trauma and chaos.
>>LEPOINT: Yeah.
>>REGINA: It's an interesting
kind of chaos theory.
[LAUGHTER]
>>REGINA: And so this happened.
And then not too
long after that,
when you were still
quite young, you
got in a playground
kerfuffle with someone
who took a ring and just--
>>LEPOINT: Yeah, it was even
worse than the playground.
>>REGINA: Where was it, again?
>>LEPOINT: It was
in a classroom!
>>REGINA: Oh, in the classroom.
>>LEPOINT: Oh, yeah, yeah.
>>REGINA: And he raked your face
with this sharp pointed object,
and ripped your skin open.
>>LEPOINT: Yeah.
I shared about this
in my TED Talk.
And that was the
first time ever--
the TED talk is "Reprogramming
Your Brain to Overcome Fear."
And that was the first
time ever, ever in my life,
I chose to share about a
trauma that I experienced.
And I have so many.
Oh, my god.
>>REGINA: Oh, yeah.
>>LEPOINT: I literally
wrote the book on this.
>>REGINA: We're going to
go through a few more,
because your life was
nothing but trauma, honestly.
>>LEPOINT: It was
very much trauma.
And I recognize that
trauma is power.
I mean, that sounds really odd.
But it's the way that we take
it and change our life with it.
>>REGINA: Well, your
life shifted after that.
>>LEPOINT: It did.
To give a background
to the story,
we lived in South
Central Los Angeles.
And at the time--
it was in the 1980s, when the
crack epidemic was the highest.
And the gangs used to
recruit young people
to go into the gangs
and do their drug runs.
And there was this boy that
was placed into our classroom.
And he was just an
innocent 10-year-old boy
that didn't know any better.
And he was taught to
file down his ring
so it acted like a knife.
So if he couldn't bring
any weapon to school,
or knife to school, he
had a ring on his finger
that passed all the security.
But it was actually a weapon.
And he and I got
into an argument,
because I always
had a smart mouth.
I always have power with words.
Now I know how to use
my words wisely now.
So he and I got
into an argument.
And then he sliced my face
open, and ripped my face open.
I almost--
>>REGINA: And almost
lost your eye.
>>LEPOINT: I almost lost my eye.
And it was-- the surgeon--
of all that kind of
right after that,
I remember being brought
to the nurse's room.
And then there's hours
of gap in my memory.
But the next thing I remember
is laying on this bed.
And the surgeon was
sewing up my eye.
And he told me that he was
going to sew my face up
so well that once I was
on TV in the future,
you wouldn't be
able to see a line.
>>REGINA: I love that.
I love that line in the book.
And you can't see a line.
>>LEPOINT: No, you
can't even see a line.
>>REGINA: Can't see it at all.
Not at all.
There's nothing there.
He was good.
>>LEPOINT: He sure was.
[LAUGHTER]
>>LEPOINT: And in
that moment in time,
instead of me looking at my
face as being ripped open,
at that moment in
time-- and I didn't
recognize what I was doing.
And I talk about this
in the book, about--
you take those fractal
moments, that decision.
And at that moment in time,
I made the decision-- ah,
I'm going to be on TV.
[LAUGHTER]
>>REGINA: And here you are.
And you have been already a lot.
>>LEPOINT: Thank you.
Thank you.
>>REGINA: And so
that was a moment--
then you ended up in a
different kind of school--
Oh, yes. after that.
So you ended up in
a magnet school--
>>LEPOINT: Oh, yeah.
>>REGINA: A wonderful kind
of artsy magnet school, yeah.
>>LEPOINT: Yeah, yeah.
My mother-- sure was
horrified, obviously.
Any mother would be.
>>REGINA: Of what happened.
>>LEPOINT: Of what happened.
>>REGINA: Well, you also
had it in your neighborhood.
You had it in your backyard--
people doing crack at night
and that kind of thing.
>>LEPOINT: Yeah.
There was-- it
was just horrible.
And my mother knew that--
she didn't have an
education at the time.
But she knew that the only
way that she could help us
is for us to get an education.
So she found a school
for me to go to.
She really did anything
and everything she could.
And she found this
school for me to go to.
And it required me to be
bused two hours to get
there and two hours to be back.
And she says, this is the
only way I can do this.
And each trip, it was
a learning experience.
And when I went to the
school, it was like--
these were like genius kids.
And I was smart.
But I wasn't like they were.
They were brilliant.
And I remember looking
at them, just like I
was looking at the scientists.
But I was--
I must have been 10,
11, 12, that age.
And I remember just noticing
how their brains worked,
how they communicated.
And then I went to a performing
arts school right afterwards.
And I learned performance,
and theater, and singing.
People will be
completely shocked
if they hear me singing opera.
They're like, oh, we know this
woman is a rocket scientist.
And it was that
process of recognizing
that I could express myself
intellectually, emotionally,
and creatively, and
even spiritually.
And it was that growth,
of being able to be
in a different environment
and see something new--
>>REGINA: Yeah.
You were given the opportunity.
>>LEPOINT: And when we see--
when we only see one
thing, when we only
know one thing, when we are
never given the opportunity
to see that another
reality exists,
we are always constantly moving
towards something in which
may not be our best interest.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>LEPOINT: When someone
goes through trauma,
the only thing that they
know is that trauma.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>LEPOINT: But if they are
given an opportunity that exists
where a life exists, where there
is not that type of trauma that
exists, but actually peace
of mind and, a way for you
to actually grow, and
OK to trust yourself,
and OK to trust other
people, and OK to learn--
that changes the brain.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>LEPOINT: And it opens
not only someone's mind up,
but their soul to move forward.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
And what's so sad is at this
very minute in South Central
LA, there are so
many geniuses that
are just-- they
have like a bucket
over their head because of
the limited possibility.
>>LEPOINT: The only thing that
separates a gang member from
a CEO--
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>LEPOINT: Is that
the gang member
didn't know that there's
processes and procedures
that he can use the same
abilities and skills in
to make billions of dollars.
>>REGINA: Mm-hmm.
Yeah.
>>LEPOINT: They're
each gifted people.
It's what are they exposed to.
>>REGINA: Exactly.
>>LEPOINT: And
that's the question.
>>REGINA: And that's what
society at large needs
to recognize.
The whole game has to
change in that way.
Education has to change.
Education needs to be
stripped to its bones,
to incorporate the way that you
understand trauma, the way you
understand the way the brain
works, to start lighting up
all of these unused brains that
are in areas that are simply
economically just
disadvantaged on every level.
You know-- no
shortage of geniuses.
>>LEPOINT: Well, thank you.
And thank you for your show.
Thank you for your
show specifically,
because this is how we get
the information out there.
This is how all of your
viewers are knowing
that they can help people.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>LEPOINT: The youngest
child-- if there's anything
that you can do, you can
find a child and mentor them.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>LEPOINT: And be
honest with yourself,
and be honest with the child.
And let the person know that no
matter what type of experiences
that they have gone
through, there's someone
honest in their life who
is willing to show them
a different life.
So they can choose that
life for themselves.
>>REGINA: Right, right.
Absolutely.
You were watching how
the brain functions
when it goes into trauma
and collapse and freezes.
And then when something
happens, where
it opens its gates of
creativity and function up,
then it freezes again.
So you were kind of diagramming
the processes of the brain
through extended trauma.
And so speak a little bit about
that and what you learned,
because you are a sponge.
You're always learning.
>>LEPOINT: My book
that I just wrote--
"Answers Unleashed"--
I share about trauma.
And I share these stories.
And they're like
traumatic stories.
But I also interject
what we learn--
>>REGINA: Right, right.
>>LEPOINT: And what I
learned specifically
from those stories,
where I share
about the science of how I
overcame certain situations,
and this new
science I'm applying
from my own experience,
how my own brain reshaped.
And what trauma does is it turns
off our frontal brain lobes.
It freezes us up.
So take a simple example.
So if you're
studying mathematics
and you don't know how
to do it, it's like--
>>REGINA: Brain freeze.
>>LEPOINT: Brain freeze.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>LEPOINT: And you're like, oh!
Oh, my god.
And that was the reason
why I wrote my first book,
"Mathaphobia," was
because there's
so many kids freezing
their brain when
they go to mathematics.
But then amplify
that 1,000 times.
Whenever we go through
a stressful situation,
our brain freeze up
1,000 times more.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>LEPOINT: And it's like-- ah!
Paralyzing.
And so we have a couple
of different responses.
And so when I was
writing this book,
I was really
writing it because I
wanted to understand
how I got through this.
And the science--
it was fascinating
to me, because I didn't know
how I overcame these situations.
And I was like, how can I
explain this to somebody else
so they can overcome
their situations too?
And the only way that
I knew how to do it
is to apply the math to it.
And what I realized is
that we have a brain flow.
It connects us.
Our frontal brain lobes connect
to our striatum in our brain.
And it also connects-- our
brain connects us to our body.
And not only that, our brain
connects us this outside world,
this gigantic field
around us that we
have this power to walk in.
>>REGINA: And the way you
put it-- after trauma,
the brain can either go into
shut-down mode and freeze,
or you can go to
rapid expansion mode.
But it really becomes a
matter of will and choice.
And talk about how this
complex works together now.
>>LEPOINT: Well,
thank you so much.
I created a term
called the Triabrain.
It is a three-sided brain.
It's the left,
right, and center.
And the left side
is very logical,
and what I've been
doing for years
with the science and technology,
engineering and mathematics.
The right side's very
expressive-- the ability
to public speak and to be
out there and share messages.
But going through my
mother's situation,
and going through
all that, I realized
that there was a faith side
of the brain, that will,
that drive, that
part of you that
comes out in the middle of
chaos, in the middle of trauma.
>>REGINA: The divine
expression of self.
>>LEPOINT: Yeah.
And that part is
embedded in the brain.
And it's really
important to note-- now,
I'm not a psychologist.
And I'm not a neuroscientist.
I'm Olympia LePoint,
who has gone
through all these
types of experiences
to recognize that there was a
way that my brain was working
to be able to get through
these type of situations.
And honestly, I couldn't
make sense of it.
And it was amazing.
And at the same time,
it was kind of like,
how can I recreate this?
How can I do that?
And the way in which I
knew how to express things
is through science.
I knew formulas.
I knew mathematical equations.
How could I represent what goes
on-- what went on in my brain
in scientific terms?
But not only that.
For all the other people
who relate to my story,
how can I explain
it to them, too,
so they could take this away?
And so I created what the
Triabrain theory of relativity
does.
And it's actually based
on Einstein's theory
of relativity--
E equals mc squared.
We've always seen that
in all of the science--
all over, everywhere.
And Einstein was a
person who truly believed
in the power of intuition.
And it was something
which he knew existed.
And he wanted to prove it.
Well, I realized that the
Triabrain theory of relativity
could be used to help
people understand
how their thoughts
change the energy
in these chaotic situations.
>>REGINA: Mm-hmm
>>LEPOINT: And it
goes like this.
The three-sided brain
is not only in our head.
It connects us to our body.
And the energy in
these connections
creates a field around us.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>LEPOINT: And these fields
around us contain our thoughts.
And the Triabrain
theory of relativity
says that each one
of my thoughts,
each one of your thoughts, each
one of the audience thoughts--
our thoughts are responsible
for converting energy
in a situation to actually
be one of two forms.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>LEPOINT: It will either be
detrimental to how we grow--
>>REGINA: Collapse.
>>LEPOINT: A collapse.
Or like the Northridge
earthquake, collapsing--
>>REGINA: Yeah, collapse.
>>LEPOINT: Or for
innovation and growth.
>>REGINA: Expansion.
We collapse and expand.
And we don't think of
our trauma in that way.
>>LEPOINT: No.
And what our trauma
does, oddly enough--
in my case, oddly
enough in my case,
the trauma was
energy for me to use.
It was energy for me to use
to create a path, a trajectory
towards rocket science.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>LEPOINT: It was an energy
that was used as a trajectory
to point me towards writing
the books, a trajectory
towards creating different
things and products for people.
>>REGINA: Before we go any
further let me just kind
of interrupt you,
because at this point,
people are going to want to
know about how do we interface
with old, what we
consider trapped trauma
to re-release the power that
was there at that point?
>>LEPOINT: Well, I'm still
finding that out myself.
And I think this is something
in which scientists are actually
going to be just
really growing from.
For me, what I had to do
in my own life is really
go to the root of the trauma.
For me, there were things
that I'd erased in my brain.
And once I had those
flashbacks, once it came,
I couldn't be scared
of it anymore.
I had to address it.
OK, for example, being raped
at eight years old-- that
would change the way that
I interacted with men.
And I had to balance that out.
I was both feminine as
well as intelligent.
And I didn't have
to pick either one.
I could walk in
being both people.
But I had to learn
how to realize
that that event when I was eight
doesn't define my reality right
now.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>LEPOINT: And
for me personally,
that's an ongoing thing.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>LEPOINT: Still-- I still have
stuff, I've got to go through.
>>REGINA: Yeah, yeah.
>>LEPOINT: I think we all
do, because we're all human.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>LEPOINT: In this
planet, we each
have encountered a traumatic
situation that has reframed
the way that we're thinking.
And it's not until we
actually have the strength
and have the truthfulness
within ourselves to look--
OK.
This is how I was
thinking before.
How am I going to
change my beliefs now,
to recognize that this is not--
>>REGINA: Who I am.
>>LEPOINT: Who I am.
>>REGINA: Yeah, and that's
really the key point.
If we all have this--
as we travel through
this process of trauma,
which is getting to a
point which is chaos--
trauma, power, raw
energy that's unleashed,
and then the restructuring,
the reframing of it.
Another thing happened
with your mother.
OK, so now your mother is
in this awful accident.
Tell us a little bit about it,
and what happened with you.
Because she was reduced to
basically being a baby, right?
>>LEPOINT: Yeah.
I was working at work,
and doing my calculations.
And this is the
most amazing thing.
Around five minutes before
I get this phone call,
I go into the restroom and I
see one of my other coworkers
there.
And she and I are talking.
And I look at her and
I say, whatever you do,
be careful when you walk
across the street today.
Just be very careful.
And she looked at me--
and Vicky is her name.
And she's one that's still a
very dear friend of mine today.
And she looked at
me and she says,
what are you talking about?
I'm like, please be
very careful when
you walk across the street.
Look both ways!
>>REGINA: Well, you're super--
you're super intuitive.
>>LEPOINT: And that's
when I realized,
that was the intuitive
side that came out.
And five minutes later
I get this phone call.
It was probably only
five or 10 minutes later,
I get this phone call.
And I had been told that my
mother was in the hospital.
She was a pedestrian
walking across the street.
And she was hit
through the accident,
and bashing her head--
with her head bashed open.
And she had to go
through brain surgery.
>>REGINA: Didn't she have a pole
or something fall on her head?
I mean, her skull was
cracked a lot of ways.
>>LEPOINT: Her skull
was cracked open.
>>REGINA: Which was a good
thing in the end, right?
>>LEPOINT: It was a
good thing, because it
allowed there to be blood to
exit her cranial capacity.
So it wouldn't be an
over-pressurization
of her skull.
>>REGINA: Right, right.
>>LEPOINT: And so her brain
could actually survive.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>LEPOINT: And she
survived the surgery.
And they didn't know whether
or not she was going to live.
But not only that,
the surgeons saw
that she had broken
vertebrae in her back.
And there were at
least five surgeons
that all witnessed this
all at the same time.
And when we were
told about that,
we were just
completely in shock.
And we prayed.
And what happened is that
we came back the next day.
My mother not only
survived the surgery,
but when they took x-rays
to see her broken vertebrae,
there were no signs
at all anymore
of any broken vertebrae,
even though the surgeons all
witnessed it with their eyes.
>>REGINA: So now
this is a matter
of extreme chaos,
extreme trauma,
but a very heavily focused
will combined with faith.
And you had the force
of faith and will,
combined with her
soul's own desire
to create a miraculous outcome.
>>LEPOINT: Yeah, yeah.
My mother-- she's Wonder Woman.
>>REGINA: Well, and she gave
birth to one-- at least one.
>>LEPOINT: Thank you.
There's a great
end to the story.
I must say, your
audience is about to hear
the great end of this story.
>>REGINA: I love
this next part, too,
that's going to happen
in a second here.
>>LEPOINT: She had to learn
how to walk, talk, eat, sleep,
and drink again.
And I remember I was
just completely in chaos.
Now imagine the earthquake
type of situation.
Now this was even far more
stressful-- far more stressful
than the earthquake
situation, bumped up,
magnitude 10 more times.
This is my mother.
And so my youngest sister
and I, we took in our mother.
And we cared for her.
And we worked with the surgeons.
We worked with the neurologist.
We worked with the
physical therapist,
we worked with
the kinesiologist,
doing anything and everything we
could-- nutritionist, anything
and everything to
help our mother.
And when people meet her
today, when they meet her
they have no clue of
what she's gone through.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>LEPOINT: We know.
>>REGINA: She's beautiful.
>>LEPOINT: Thank you.
Thank you.
She's a beautiful
person, inside and out.
And she helped me
so much, because I
was able to see what the
human will is able to do.
>>REGINA: Yes, and it was your
combined will in this case,
which is really--
that's the story of the
potential of humanity.
And that's the story
of the potential
of our healing through trauma.
In your book, you talk about
a lot of different ways
we can start accessing
these parts of ourselves--
>>LEPOINT: Yes, yes.
>>REGINA: Because
the recognition
of truth within our own being is
the power point that unleashes
all of this energy,
as happened to you,
and myself, and many
people watching, right?
>>LEPOINT: Oh, yeah.
>>REGINA: And you talk
about different methods
that we can do that through.
>>LEPOINT: I give
exercises in the book.
>>REGINA: And you give
OK, so at least one-- you have
all these things in your book.
But let's just take
one little tip,
for example, a little
exercise you give people.
>>LEPOINT: This
is a fun exercise.
It is getting in touch with what
you are thinking when you don't
know what you're thinking.
And it's really simple.
It is to journal.
And you just simply take out
some blank sheets of paper
and take out a pen.
And you literally
write down everything
which is going through your mind
about a particular situation
that's stressing you out.
And you write and
write and write.
Get everything it is that
you need off your chest
onto this piece of paper.
>>REGINA: Unedited, obviously.
>>LEPOINT: Unedited.
>>REGINA: Unanalyzed.
>>LEPOINT: Unanalyzed.
It is raw.
[LAUGHTER]
>>LEPOINT: You
just put this out.
And you just get it
out of your body.
Literally, by you moving
it through your hands,
through your nervous system, and
putting it on a piece of paper,
you're actually changing
the energy inside of you.
So when you write it on this
piece of paper, you get it up.
And that's acknowledgment.
You know how even in
traditional settings, when
people are going through,
let's say, difficult times--
I think it's in AA where
they say, OK, you've
first got to admit
that there's a problem.
>>REGINA: Yeah, yeah.
Exactly.
>>LEPOINT: This is
the first thing.
You've got to write it down.
>>REGINA: Well, that
is a science, too.
Yeah.
>>LEPOINT: Yeah.
It's like admitting
that there's a problem.
There's a problem!
So often, we bottle things up.
And we don't address
how we're really
feeling about a situation.
And we keep it-- we are not
speaking up for ourself.
>>REGINA: Right.
I actually did an interview
a little while ago
with a woman named
Eileen Day McKusick.
And basically, her area
is healing through tone,
but looking at it from a
scientific point of view--
>>LEPOINT: Yeah.
>>REGINA: That all these
traumas are layered and trapped
in the aura as it extends
out from the body,
almost like tree rings.
And she uses tone, in her
case, to start unleashing
the power of those traumas.
>>LEPOINT: So in this case,
unleashing that type of trauma
is through action.
But it's conscious
action of acknowledging
where the problem is.
How you feel about
something, and recognizing
there needs to be a shift.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>LEPOINT: So that's number one.
So you write this down.
Very easy.
All right, wait some time.
Eat some food.
Go for a walk.
Do something that just
clears your brain.
And then come back to this,
maybe 10 minutes later,
next day, whenever you
feel the strength to do it.
And you re-read the paper--
everything.
And you'll be like, oh, my god!
I can't believe I wrote that.
Oh, my god, oh, my God.
And then you take your
non-dominant hand--
whatever hand it is that
you do not write with.
You're going to
write with that hand.
And you're going to sit down.
And you're going to literally
write a letter to yourself.
>>REGINA: That takes some time.
>>LEPOINT: It takes some time.
And I've heard some
people-- like, they
don't know what to write.
And just gibberish comes out.
And that's fine.
It takes a little
while to do this.
You write from your heart.
You write whatever you hear,
whatever comes to your vision,
whatever it is that you sense.
This is for you to
actually embrace
what it is that you are sensing
and feeling and experiencing
that is going to be eye-opening.
>>REGINA: About
the same situation?
>>LEPOINT: About
the same situation.
And you write a letter
back to yourself
with whatever comes to
your heart, whatever
comes to your brain,
whatever comes to you.
And you don't think about it.
You just do it.
And when you do it,
you write whatever
it is that you need to
look at, really get it out.
Then you read the
letter that you wrote.
When you read the letter that
you wrote back to yourself,
that tells you--
nine times out of 10--
the answer to how to handle
the situation that you're
dealing with right now.
>>REGINA: Makes total sense.
It's using opposite sides
of the brain, and as you
say, the Triabrain.
The intuitive, the
heart-- all of that
starts coming together
at the same time.
Makes total sense.
That's a great tip.
>>LEPOINT: Yeah.
And my family-- my
mother's Native American.
And so there's a
Native American ritual
of burning and giving
back to the earth,
recognizing that Mother Earth
is going to handle this,
and honoring the
big flow of things
in a way that's
bigger than our self.
And what I have learned from
my coach is to literally--
and this is just what I do.
And this is just me
personally, what I did.
I wrote this letter at first.
And I wrote the
letter back to myself.
And I would just pray over it.
And I would put it
in a big steel pot.
And I'd burn it!
[LAUGHTER]
>>LEPOINT: I'd burn
it and I'd bury it.
And I'd give it
back to the Earth.
And I'd just pray.
I'm like God and
Earth, I just ask
that you take this and
rebirth it into something
that's going to be meaningful.
>>REGINA: On that note--
well, you've been
absolutely delightful.
I've so enjoyed spending
my time with you.
And you have a lot
more tips in the book.
>>LEPOINT: Oh, I have--
>>REGINA: We've just barely
scratched the surface,
because I was so into
your personal story
that we neglected to get
into some of the science,
as I said earlier.
But that's OK.
Anybody that wants to dive
deeper can go to the book.
>>LEPOINT: Thank you.
And thank you for
being on your show.
Thank you.
>>REGINA: Thank you so much.
Again, the title of Olympia's
book is "Answers Unleashed--
The Science of Unleashing
Your Brain's Power."
Until next time, thank
you for joining us here
on "Open Minds."